
=== Page 1 ===

cba
B. König-Ries et al. (Hrsg.): Datenbanksysteme für Business, Technologie und Web (BTW 2023),
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2023 1
On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization
Dennis Aumiller1, Jing Fan2, Michael Gertz3
Abstract: With recent advancements in the area of Natural Language Processing, the focus is slowly
shifting from a purely English-centric view towards more language-specific solutions, including
German. Especially practical for businesses to analyze their growing amount of textual data are
text summarization systems, which transform long input documents into compressed and more
digestible summary texts. In this work, we assess the particular landscape of German abstractive
text summarization and investigate the reasons why practically useful solutions for abstractive text
summarization are still absent in industry.
Our focus is two-fold, analyzing a) training resources, and b) publicly available summarization
systems. We are able to show that popular existing datasets exhibit crucial flaws in their assumptions
about the original sources, which frequently leads to detrimental effects on system generalization
and evaluation biases. We confirm that for the most popular training dataset, MLSUM, over 50% of
the training set is unsuitable for abstractive summarization purposes. Furthermore, available systems
frequently fail to compare to simple baselines, and ignore more effective and efficient extractive
summarization approaches. We attribute poor evaluation quality to a variety of different factors, which
are investigated in more detail in this work: A lack of qualitative (and diverse) gold data considered for
training, understudied (and untreated) positional biases in some of the existing datasets, and the lack
of easily accessible and streamlined pre-processing strategies or analysis tools. We therefore provide a
comprehensive assessment of available models on the cleaned versions of datasets, and find that this
can lead to a reduction of more than 20 ROUGE-1 points during evaluation. As a cautious reminder
for future work, we also highlight the problems of solely relying on 𝑛-gram based scoring methods
by presenting particularly problematic failure cases. The code for dataset filtering and reproducing
results can be found online: https://github.com/dennlinger/summaries
Keywords: Abstractive Text Summarization; Natural Language Generation; German; Evaluation
1
Introduction
Libraries simplifying the access to pre-trained neural models have greatly pushed the recent
advancement of state-of-the-art performance in many tasks [Wo20]. However, with the
general absence of non-English resources, one of the prevalent challenges in the Natural
Language Processing (NLP) community is the extension of approaches to other languages
beyond English. Subsequently, evaluation quality and consistency is even harder to maintain
1 Heidelberg University, Institute of Computer Science, Im Neuenheimer Feld 205, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
aumiller@informatik.uni-heidelberg.de
2 Heidelberg University, Institute of Computer Science, Im Neuenheimer Feld 205, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
j.fan@stud.uni-heidelberg.de
3 Heidelberg University, Institute of Computer Science, Im Neuenheimer Feld 205, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
gertz@informatik.uni-heidelberg.de
arXiv:2301.07095v1  [cs.CL]  17 Jan 2023

=== Page 2 ===

2 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
in setups, where high-quality gold data is scarce. This can lead to unintended consequences
during the interpretation of model performance and generalization capabilities beyond
narrow domain-specific use cases.
A sub-task of the NLP community that deserves particular attention is text summarization.
The focus here is to produce an abridged version of an input text that accurately summarizes
the key points of the original text. Such systems offer an immediate benefit in times with
ever-increasing amounts of textual information, and allow users to quickly grasp the contents
of even complex documents. In particular, we differentiate between various sub-tasks of text
summarization: extractive systems provide summaries by simply copying text snippets from
the original input, which is efficient to compute, but comes at the cost of lower textual fluency.
On the other hand, abstractive summarization systems may introduce new phrases, or even
full sentences, which are not present in the original document. This potentially increases a
summary’s fluency and conciseness over extractive methods. Abstractive text summarization
systems are generally built upon the more recent development of sequence-to-sequence
neural models [SVL14, BCB15], which come with an exploding computational cost.
Particularly for (abstractive) summarization, the previously mentioned issues of data
scarcity for non-English methods are further worsened by a lack of diverse (and readily
available) evaluation metrics. Most works rely entirely on 𝑛-gram-based analysis of system
summaries, such as ROUGE [Li04], which cannot accurately judge the truthfulness of a
generated summary, i.e., how accurately the original text’s factual statements are represented
in the generated summary. Only few works extend their evaluation to human result
inspections, given its higher cost. However, there are several critical assumptions that
–even under basic premises– are exposed as oftentimes insufficient for a comprehensive
analysis [SJ97, tHKdR20]. Examples are the focus on singular target summaries, ignoring
the subjective nature of differing viewpoints of annotators, as well as the focus on particularly
prominent sentences in the first few paragraphs of reference articles [Zh21b].
In this work, we focus on German abstractive summarization systems and set out to
investigate, reproduce, and evaluate summarization systems. In conjunction to a model-
centric view of summarization, we further review the existing training resources for German,
including their particular domain and data curation processes.
1. We find that in particular automatically created and multilingual resources suffer
from insufficient pre-processing, potentially due to the absence of a native speaker
during the curation process.
2. News documents seem to be overly represented in trained systems, potentially due to
a popularity bias in English summarization datasets for news resources.
3. Baseline scores are heavily affected by data biases in test sets of prominent datasets.

=== Page 3 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 3
Upon conducting a qualitative analysis of outputs from publicly available models, we further
find that most systems fall severely short of the expected quality in at least one of the
following areas:
1. Due to positional biases, text snippets may be directly copied from the beginning
of the input text, constituting an extractive instead of an abstractive summary.
Especially considering the computational requirements of neural systems being orders
of magnitudes greater than simple extractive summarizers, this undermines the quality
of neural text generations.
2. Generated outputs may contain (severe) syntactic errors, to the point of becoming
illegible or hard to interpret.
3. Semantic mistakes introduce factual errors, leading to incorrect conclusions from the
summary alone. This problem is exacerbated for longer input documents, where a
structured content understanding is necessary to maintain factual consistency.
For data-centric issues, current pipelines are not taking user-specified filtering steps into
account; oftentimes, datasets are directly used “out of the box”, without any further data
verification step involved. For this purpose, we extend available summarization-specific
filtering steps and provide a simple-to-use and language-agnostic processing library.
For model-centric problems, it is near impossible to identify failure cases with existing
metrics; costly manual inspection of individual samples would be required. Simultaneously,
we work towards expanding the available scores to help facilitate a better understanding
of current expectations towards summarization systems. In the following, we will briefly
mention work on automated evaluation of summarization systems, including a comprehensive
look at the current landscape of German abstractive summarization; we follow with a formal
introduction of our proposed filtering methods for summarization datasets, as well as a list
of model-centric checks to consider. We discuss exhibited quality issues in existing datasets
and systems for German summarization, and conclude with a brief outlook for future work.
2
Related Work
We establish an extensive overview of currently available training resources for German
summarization systems and survey the landscape of trained models, with a particular focus
on publicly available methods.
Aside from this, we further reiterate some of the common pitfalls in evaluating summarization
systems, which will become particularly relevant during the experiments in this work.

=== Page 4 ===

4 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
2.1
German Data Sources for Summarization
In our experiments, we focus on seven different datasets across a variety of domains. To
our knowledge, these cover all of the publicly available sources used for training German
systems.
MLSUM [Sc20]
This multilingual dataset was presented as one of the first efforts in
making larger-scale training sets available for multiple languages that also include German
as a language. MLSUM is constructed by extracting news articles and associated summary
sections as generation targets. We use the German subset in this work, which is by far the
most popular dataset used for training and evaluating resources in German, based on our
survey. Despite its popularity, issues in the quality of samples have gone unnoticed until
early 2022, when Philip May [Ma22] was the first to report on problems with fully extractive
summaries, an aspect we will analyze in more detail later.
MassiveSumm [VS21]
The construction of this particular dataset is similar to MLSUM
and focuses on a large number of automatically extracted summaries from news articles in
multiple languages. The authors perform some rudimentary filtering with respect to empty
samples and even go as far as avoiding similar issues to MLSUM by removing what they call
“ellipsoid summaries”, i.e., fully extractive summaries that appear at the beginning of the
reference text. While the quality of the samples is comparatively low due to the automated
extraction process, this corpus is by far the largest considered, with around 480,000 samples,
and has the potential to improve existing training setups with its sheer number of samples.
Swisstext [FVM20, Fr20]
In contrast to the –generally shorter– news articles available in
MLSUM, the Swisstext dataset provides longer-form summaries based on German Wikipedia
pages, which has been later extended to the GeWiki corpus [Fr20]. For the construction,
the central argument is that the introductionary paragraph serves as a “summary” of the
remaining article text. The provided dataset comes with a training portion and a private test
set, meaning no ground truth summaries are available for the test samples. A multilingual
variant of this idea, the XWikis corpus, was introduced shortly after [PBL21]. While the
XWikis corpus contains more samples per language, including for German, monolingual
data is not readily available for download. Adding the fact that German summarization
works primarily deal with the Swisstext dataset, we choose the latter for our experiments.
Klexikon [AG22]
Another Wikipedia-related resource, but with different target summaries.
Instead of utilizing a page’s introductionary paragraph, the authors align articles from a
simplified children’s encyclopedia (Klexikon) on the same topic. Consequently, this dataset
has much longer summary lengths but covers a much smaller subset of only around 3,000

=== Page 5 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 5
samples. Given the secondary focus on simplification in the target summaries, this corpus
requires a considerably higher level of abstractive reformulations during the generation.
WikiLingua [La20]
As the third multilingual resource, summaries in this corpus are
extracted from the WikiHow platform. Here, Ladhak et al. [La20] consider short instruction
summaries of individual steps in WikiHow guides and align those with the referenced
paragraphs. The general tone of the dataset is rather informal and is in a more imperative
style in comparison to other data sources. To align non-English samples, associated images
are used to identify paragraphs occurring in different languages. Importantly, this means that
for German articles, frequently only some of the article’s paragraphs are actually contained
in the dataset.
LegalSum [GMM21]
Another area benefiting enormously from high-quality summaries
is the legal domain. LegalSum is the first German resource providing summaries of around
100,000 court rulings. On average, these samples require the highest amount of compression
across evaluated datasets.
EUR-Lex-Sum [ACG22]
As a secondary resource for legal texts, Aumiller et al. present
a multilingual corpus based on EU-level legal acts, semi-aligned across languages. The
corpus is considerably smaller than LegalSum, with only about 1,900 German documents
available. While the EUR-Lex-Sum corpus has extremely long documents, it also presents a
more challenging summary generation with the longest average summary length across all
considered corpora (generally between 600-800 words). Importantly, summaries are also
written by human expert annotators and therefore present a much higher-quality standard
for summaries compared to some of the other datasets.
Further Resources
In addition to these datasets, we are aware of at least two more
news-related resources. One is used in experiments by Nitsche [Ni19], where data was
supplied by the German Press Agency, but no public record of it exists. The second corpus
is hinted at online by users on Huggingface’s platform4.
For clinical summarization, Liang et al. [Li22] present a resource of about 11,000 radiology
reports; given the sensitive nature of the data, no publicly available version exists as of
now. We are also aware of a secondary source of the WikiLingua dataset by GEM5, which
provides additional samples, as well as a pre-split validation and test section not provided in
the original German subset. In preliminary experiments, we found that > 99.89% of the data
were valid samples for the GEM source. Most problematic is the automatic combination of
4 A news corpus with ca. 400,000 articles is indicated here: https://huggingface.co/Einmalumdiewelt/
PegasusXSUM_GNAD/discussions/1#6308eb5037556c4ab03258df, last accessed: 2023-01-14
5 https://gem-benchmark.com/data_cards/wiki_lingua, last accessed: 2023-01-14

=== Page 6 ===

6 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
paragraphs into one summary, which can cause disjoint reference texts or summaries.
Finally, all of the discussed corpora so far are types of single document summarization
resources, where a summary is extracted from a singular text only. Datasets for training
summarization systems that consider multiple source texts exist at smaller scales, but require
further manual adjustment for acquisition [Be16, Zo18]. More recent experiments with
neural models utilizing the latter corpus have been conducted by Johner et al. [JJB21].
2.2
German Summarization Systems
Model
Training data
Test Set
Evaluation
Filtering
Public Reprod.
mrm8488/bert2bert6
MLSUM
MLSUM
ROUGE
None


ml6team/mt5-small7
MLSUM
MLSUM
ROUGE
Length


T-Systems/mt5-small8
CNN/DailyMail,
MLSUM, XSum,
Swisstext
MLSUM
ROUGE
Length &
Overlap


Shahm/t5-small9
MLSUM
MLSUM
ROUGE
None


T5-base10
?
?
ROUGE
?


german-t511
Swisstext
MLSUM
ROUGE
?


BERT-Copy [Ak20]
Swisstext
Swisstext
ROUGE &
manual
?

?
Transformer [PM19]
Swisstext &
CommonCrawl
Swisstext
ROUGE &
manual
None


Fact-Encoder [Ve19]
Swisstext
Swisstext
ROUGE &
manual
None


Pointer-Gen [FBZ19]
Swisstext
Swisstext
ROUGE &
manual
?


Enc-Dec [GMM21]
LegalSum
LegalSum
ROUGE
?

?
bert2bert [Li22]
Radiology
Radiology
ROUGE &
manual
?


Tab. 1: List of German abstractive summarization systems. We detail their known properties from
training recipes or papers. If we have access to models, we denote whether public scores are
reproducible within ±0.5 ROUGE points (“Reprod.”); ? in the reproducibility column indicates
models that are available, however, we were unable to successfully run locally.
While we are slowly starting to see a greater diversity in the available training resources
for German text summarization, it comes as a small surprise that the availability of trained
system is much less diverse. As will become more apparent in later sections, the primary
focus for training systems is a combination of a pre-trained checkpoint and one predominant
training resource (“MLSUM”, particularly the German subset). Below, we elaborate on

=== Page 7 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 7
considered model properties, differentiating between the availability levels of related works
and their backgrounds. A summary of known properties can be seen in Table 1.
2.2.1
Publicly Available Systems
The primary source for available models is the Huggingface Hub12, which allows filtering
by supported language and appropriate task (in our case summarization). We note that some
of the available models are not properly tagged, but spent considerable time to ensure no
other models were accidentally ignored. For users who have uploaded several different
versions, we selected the model with the highest self-reported evaluation scores.
Given that users on the platform are likely familiar with other services of Huggingface
(including their datasets browser), it comes as no surprise that the diversity between models
and training setups is low. The primary choice falls on either mT5 [Xu21] or variants of
T5 [Ra20], with some alternatives based on (m)BART [Le20, Li20] being consistently
outperformed according to self-reported metrics by authors. In order to train effectively on
large quantities on data, most approaches use one of the smaller checkpoints, referring to
model variants with fewer parameters. Outside of the model hub, code repositories exist for
the BERT-Copy architecture by Aksenov et al. [Ak20] and Encoder-Decoder models used
by Glaser et al. [GMM21]. However, we were unable to set up inference for custom datasets
based on the respective code bases.
2.2.2
Private Models
A further selection of models has been published in response to the Swisstext 2019
summarization challenge [PM19, Ve19, FBZ19]. However, neither team has published any
associated public repository. Similarly, no models are available from Liang et al.’s work on
radiology reports [Li22]. As the only one of the major cloud providers, Microsoft offers
an extractive summarization service through Azure that supports German.13 Otherwise,
the only commercial solution providing a platform for abstractive summarization also
supporting German texts is currently Aleph Alpha.14
6 https://hf.co/mrm8488/bert2bert_shared-german-finetuned-summarization, last accessed: 2022-10-06
7 https://huggingface.co/ml6team/mt5-small-german-finetune-mlsum, last accessed: 2022-10-06
8 https://huggingface.co/T-Systems-onsite/mt5-small-sum-de-en-v2, last accessed: 2022-10-06
9 https://huggingface.co/Shahm/t5-small-german, last accessed: 2022-10-06
10 https://huggingface.co/Einmalumdiewelt/T5-Base_GNAD, last accessed: 2022-10-06
11 https://github.com/GermanT5/german-t5-eval, last accessed: 2022-10-06
12 https://huggingface.co/models, last accessed: 2023-01-14
13 https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/language-service/summarization/
language-support, last accessed: 2022-10-06
14 https://www.aleph-alpha.com/use-cases/conversion#trilingual-summary, last accessed: 2022-10-06

=== Page 8 ===

8 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
2.3
Evaluation Metrics for Summarization
As previously mentioned, the de-facto gold standard for evaluating summarization systems
is the usage of ROUGE [Li04]. The authors introduce unigram overlap (ROUGE-1), bigram
overlap (ROUGE-2) and the longest common subsequence (ROUGE-L) between system
and gold predictions. The underlying core assumption is based on 𝑛-gram co-occurrences
in the generated text with respect to one or more gold summaries. The fact that ROUGE
can handle several reference samples at the same time is crucial for understanding some
of the implications in the later parts of this work: with several references, variation in
wording, e.g., particular expressions, are much easier to compare against than in a single
reference summary. However, despite the theoretical support for multi-labels, few datasets
ever provide such costly annotations.
In turn, more recently proposed alternatives to ROUGE rely on score computation from
a single gold summary only [ECM19]. Examples include primarily neural similarity
scoring between a generated summary and a gold reference [SDP20, Zh20]. Ultimately,
neural methods are also incredibly expensive to employ for evaluation settings, potentially
taking several days to evaluate a single test set [Na21]. Besides the cost factor, the main
issue with such alternative scores is two-fold: On the one hand, a distinct advantage of
simple co-occurrence-based metrics such as ROUGE is the simplicity in transferring it
to another language. Even basic extensions, such as stemmers, are readily available in a
multitude of languages other than English. Trained metrics, such as BERTScore [Zh20] or
QAEval [DBWR21], however, are severely limited in their transferability to other languages,
and would require dedicated efforts to port them to German, for example. On the other
hand, recent statistical analyses have shown that when accounting for annotator expertise,
correlation can vary significantly [Fa21]. When additionally controlling for variance and
confidence intervals, correlation with human judgments over ROUGE correlation is only
statistically significant in rare cases [DDR21]. A particular investigation on metrics for
German summarization was conducted during the second Swisstext challenge [FVM20].
However, submitted resources were only marginally better than ROUGE baselines for
judging system quality [PC20, Bi20]. For crowd-sourced evaluation approaches, Iskender
et al. [IPM20] further elaborate on the importance of survey setups and considerations for
expert annotators to ground evaluation results.
3
Assessing the Quality of Summarization Systems
When using existing models for abstractive text summarization, the expectation is that
they should work “as expected”, meaning that a model provides appropriate and correct
summaries. However, in practice, the automated collection of samples may lead to insufficient
sample quality or systematic biases in the data. This has further detrimental consequences
for models trained on those datasets.
In this section, we lay out a series of very basic sanity checks for both data and models,
which help to ensure a minimal level of generalization from experimental results. As we will

=== Page 9 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 9
Issue
Reference
Summary
Short text
Wir verwenden Cookies, um unser Angebot
für Sie zu verbessern. Mehr Informationen [...].
–
Duplicates
‘Virtuelles Bergsteigen mit dem Project360 [...]
Leben und Kultur in Europa
Historische Dokumente: Bilder der Wende [...]
Leben und Kultur in Europa
Relative Length
Chef-Sprüche: “Ich sehe meine
Kinder auch nur im Urlaub.”
Die besten Chef-Sprüche zum
Thema Überstunden.
Fig. 1: List of faulty summarization samples in the MassiveSumm dataset uncovered by various
data checks. Despite checking for unrelated issues, we notice a trend where filtered samples are of
especially low semantic quality, too.
later find, even such basic data assurances lead to a significant reduction of valid samples in
available German summarization data.
3.1
Data-centric Sanity Checks
The best strategy to achieve decent experimental results is ensuring high quality in the
training data – in line with the popular saying “garbage in, garbage out”. We present a
list of minimal quality checks for individual samples, as well as dataset-wide assurances
of data quality. Most of these measures are fully automated and at most require single
hyperparameter settings to filter datasets.
Further, suggested data checks are language-independent at their core and can therefore be
applied in basic form to any dataset, even beyond German. This also implies that no further
existing tools or libraries for tokenization, etc., are required.
Empty Samples
The most trivial sanity check is verifying that both the reference text
and summary are present for all samples. This is simultaneously the most prevalent check
implemented by authors of resource papers in our experience. Even so, several issues can
arise for this criterion, primarily revolving around varying definitions of “emptiness”. For
example, one could also consider a sample as empty if only whitespaces (or whitespace-like
symbols, such as \t) are present. Extensions are, for example, faulty encodings or only
special characters in a text (cf., data audit insights by Kreutzer et al. [Kr22]).
Minimum Text Length
A superset of “empty samples”, imposing a required minimum
text length presents a stricter filtering criterion for sample validity. Where empty texts
are universally to be avoided, hard length requirements are harder to impose, since the
appropriate cutoff depends strongly on the dataset domain. For domain-specific datasets,
e.g., the instruction-like texts in the WikiLingua dataset [La20], having extremely short
summaries with only a few characters (and comparatively short references) may make sense.

=== Page 10 ===

10 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
For summaries stemming from news articles, however, length requirements imposed on the
reference might ensure a longer minimum text length for quality control.
Compression Ratio Filtering
Another key metric used in summarization research is the
Compression Ratio (CR), defined as the relation between reference text length and summary
length. We follow the definition by Grusky et al. [GNA18]: 𝐶𝑅(ref, summ) =
len(ref)
len(summ) .
For filtering by compression ratio, a significant difference should be ensured by establishing
a minimum compression ratio. For our purposes, we argue that a reduction of at least 20%
in the summary length is required, which equals 𝐶𝑅≥1.25. We note that this is not a
strict requirement per se and may depend on domain-specific factors. It can be argued,
however, that samples with summaries longer (or equal) than their respective references
(i.e., 𝐶𝑅≤1.0) always pose an inadequate sample and must be filtered.
Related work sometimes takes a more drastic approach to compression ratio filtering,
arguing that extreme content reduction may result in a lossy summary and should therefore
also be avoided [Ur22].
Duplicate Removal
Some lesser-checked property seems to be the existence of duplicates
in training data, which is also applicable in more general machine learning settings. However,
given that each sample for summarization comes with two distinct texts (the reference and
the summary), we can further distinguish between different instances of duplication. Trivial
to consider are instances of what we call exact duplicates, i.e., samples that have the exact
same combination of reference and summary appearing as another tuple in the dataset.
We can further expand this idea by three more considerations, which we call partial
duplicates. These are instances where we find either the reference or summary in other
dataset instances. Finally, it could also occur that both summary and reference are duplicated,
but across different samples; such instances are also considered partial duplicates and are
relatively rare.
To understand why duplicates, including partial ones, can be considered harmful as a training
resource, we need only look at the potential effects during training or evaluation. For exact
duplicates, no real gain is achieved by including one sample several times in the training
data. Worse yet, if we encounter exact duplicates across different splits, this can cause active
falsification of evaluation results (train-test leakage). While partial duplicates are less severe,
we still encourage removal, as they can cause confusion during the learning process: cases
where different input texts should generate the same summary hamper generalization of
models, and the reverse case of similar input texts generating different summaries conveys
unclear learning signals during training. Finally, we also want to note that partial duplicates
can uncover incorrectly aligned samples (cf. Fig. 1).
While spotting duplicates is fairly straightforward, removing duplicate content is often
non-trivial, as there exist several valid strategies for deduplication, leading to differing
results. In an attempt to reduce impact on smaller test and validation sets, we adopt a
“additive” strategy for the remainder of this work. We start with an empty dataset, and

=== Page 11 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 11
iteratively add new samples if and only if neither the reference nor the summary have been
previously included.
Sample Inspection
Even with all of the proposed automated measures, nothing can ensure
data quality quite as well as manually inspecting data. All of the previous measures can
point to systemic failures in the data collection process, but may ignore more localized
quality issues for particular samples. While a manual analysis step is not feasible at scale,
often enough reviewing few samples will already reveal tendencies about the underlying
data quality. We generally differentiate between the following strategies to inspect data
samples and their respective up- and downsides:
1. Reviewing samples in order: A linear sequence of samples may reveal particular
issues in the consistency of samples, which can be linked to the crawling process.
We emphasize that “linearity” can follow many particular axes, not just the order in
which data is stored. Further possible orderings can be based on available metadata
descriptors, such as sortings by timestamps, source or length. In-order samples are
most likely to uncover systematic issues, such as incorrect alignment settings that
span several samples.
2. Reviewing random samples: Another popular approach is to shuffle data and
randomly select instances for review. This is fairly easy to implement and does not
require iterating over the full dataset or sorting operations. Advantages of random
reviews are a more holistic coverage of the data distribution, but requires potentially
more manual reviews to find systemic failures.
3. Outliers and representative samples: If data statistics are already known or easy
to compute, a more targeted approach is to look for distributional outliers. There
are again a variety of metrics that can be considered, with the most obvious being
text length and compression ratio of individual samples. Manually reviewing outliers
can also sharpen the requirements of expected outputs, e.g., the minimum/maximum
length of a summary in relation to the input text. Related are representative samples,
which constitute instances close to the mean or median of a distribution.
3.2
Model-centric Checks
While we have compiled a detailed list of what can be done about checking the data used
for summarization systems, it is significantly harder to judge a trained system, especially
given that many neural methods can only be treated as black box systems. But even with
a lack of clarity around the original training procedures and model learnings, we can use
several probing techniques to estimate the robustness and performance of systems.

=== Page 12 ===

12 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
Evaluation on Cleaned Test Sets
The standard procedure to evaluate on withheld (but still
in-domain) test sets. While these evaluation approaches may give insights on the overfitting
of trained models, such experiments tend to fall short of giving more concrete evidence on
the pattern of how summaries are generated. This is especially crucial if no further manual
evaluation is performed. Testing models on modified or generalized test data can serve
as a partial remedy to this, by probing the generalization ability of particular systems. In
combination with the proposed filtering techniques, we suggest the evaluation on cleaned
test sets for models that were trained on the unfiltered training set. The main advantage
is that no additional re-training with altered training sets is required, and insights can be
acquired from a generally much smaller evaluation set through inference alone. Further, we
hypothesize that intrinsic summarization metrics [NCL18, GNA18, Zh19, BC20] applied
to system summaries can be used as a preliminary gauge for text quality in comparison to
the original input. Especially abstractiveness of generated outputs, essentially constituting
the number of novel 𝑛-grams in summaries, could indicate changes in the vocabulary.
Domain Generalization
An extreme case of the previous point is testing on completely
out-of-domain data, which usually means taking test splits of a different dataset. While this
approach can be useful to evaluate general purpose summarization systems, the evaluated
models in this work all present rather focused domain-specific summarization systems. For
this reason, we refrain from evaluating performance based on out-of-domain abilities.
Factual Consistency
A rather important argument for summarization especially: facts
that are stated in the original reference text must be maintained in the respective summary.
Therefore, models should be measured with respect to their truthfulness, which has been
previously attempted with automatic metrics for English summarization systems [Kr20], or
even implemented as an optimization target for more truthful summaries [Zh21a].
3.3
Extractive Models and Baseline Systems
Given the relatively one-dimensional approach to evaluation, we should at least expect
additional context for better interpretability of model scores. In practice though, we rarely
find a consistent reporting of baseline scores, if any comparisons are reported at all. To this
end, we strive to provide consistent baselines and reporting of such in the context of German
abstractive summarization. In addition to the scores, baselines also serve an important
purpose by providing a sensible complexity trade-off: Unlike most neural methods, they
should be able to generate summaries faster and with fewer parameters than heavy-weight
state-of-the-art approaches. Similar to English works, we therefore fall back on extractive
summarization systems, which – as the name indicates – simply copy text snippets from the
reference to generate a summary.
To our knowledge, the only work that has explicitly worked on extractive summarization for

=== Page 13 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 13
German is over 20 years old [Re00]. This does not imply, however, that there is no dedicated
extractive system available. Especially for unsupervised methods, such as TextRank [MT04]
or LexRank [ER04], language-specific taggers or lemmatizers can easily be replaced in
existing libraries to enable application on German texts as well. For our experiments, we
rely on three variants of baselines, which extract a specified number of sentences from the
input text to generate a summary. Overall, extractive summaries are guaranteed to ensure a
more factually consistent summary, and have high intra-sentence coherence. On the other
hand, these methods cannot be fine-tuned and rely on singular hyperparameters – the length
of the generated summary. This can still significantly impact the evaluation performance,
but does not factor in domain-specific variance in text distribution. For all systems, we rely
on the sentence splitting module by spaCy15, unless datasets provide a pre-split sentence
format.
Lead-3
The simplest possible baseline system is lead-3, popularized by Nallapati et
al. [NZZ17] as a simple but strong baseline for news article summarization. Here, the
summary is equal to the first three sentences of an input text. The method works particularly
well for news texts, where key information has to be conveyed early on to both inform and
catch the interest of a potential reader. The prevalence of this so-called “lead bias” differs
significantly across different domains.
Lead-𝑘
For other domains, three sentences may underestimate the actual summary length.
For this purpose, Aumiller and Gertz [AG22] introduce a variant that extends the lead
baseline to the 𝑘leading sentences, in their particular context the full first paragraph of a
Wikipedia page. Given that in general, datasets do not contain paragraph-level information,
the authors later extended this baseline and instead consider an approximate ˆ𝑘for each
sample by using the average compression ratio [ACG22]:
ˆ𝑘= len(reference)
𝐶𝑅avg
,
(1)
where len(reference) is the number of sentences in the summary, and 𝐶𝑅avg denotes the
average compression ratio across the training split of a dataset.
Modified LexRank (LexRank-ST)
A more complex baseline that also considers sentences
at other positions of the article is a modification of LexRank [ER04], similarly used by
Aumiller et al. [AG22, ACG22]. The key modification lies in exchanging the centrality
computation – which is originally based on pure occurrence counts – with dense sentence
embeddings obtained through sentence-transformers [RG19, RG20]. While the underlying
neural model can be of arbitrary complexity, it does not need to be trained further to work
15 We use the model de_core_news_sm in our experiments.

=== Page 14 ===

14 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
in the summarization application. After scoring individual sentences, the highest-ranking 𝑘
sentences are selected as the summary; we use the same method for estimating an optimal
length ˆ𝑘as for the lead-𝑘baseline.
Finally, we also point towards oracle extractive summaries as a form of upper-bound
for extractive summarization, which can be computed from greedy ROUGE-2 align-
ments [NZZ17, GMM21]. Given that we focus on abstractive results in this work, we omit
the computation of extractive oracle summaries.
4
A Sober Look at State-of-the-Art Results
Given the presented set of tools, we now set out to put current models’ capabilities into a
better context. To this end, we conduct a set of four experiments: We start by applying the
filters introduced in Sect. 3.1 to available German summarization datasets, noting varying
size reductions as a result. To remedy the changes introduced by our filtering, we re-compute
a set of strong baselines as updated results for datasets with available validation and test
sets. Further, given the previously uncovered discrepancies in some datasets, we repeat
more comprehensive experiments on MLSUM and MassiveSumm across the pre- and
post-filtered dataset to highlight the effect of filtering on ROUGE scores. We are able to
show that this change in data quality also significantly impacts the reproducibility of results.
Finally, we provide a small case study in which we examine a subset of generated samples
that highlight some of the particular model-centric issues.
4.1
Filtering Datasets
Key Finding 1: German subsets of two popular multilingual resources (ML-
SUM and MassiveSumm) have extreme data quality issues, affecting more
than 25% of samples across all splits.
Table 2 presents our findings for filtering the available German summarization datasets;
hyperparameters for filters are specified in the table caption. We refrain from imposing any
particularly strict filtering metrics, particularly for the length of texts. Most concerning is
the fraction of affected samples in MLSUM, given its popularity as a training resource for
many public models. While a strong lead bias is to be expected due to the domain of these
samples being exclusively news articles, the eventual performance of models trained on the
unfiltered dataset is severely impacted; a finding that we confirm in subsequent experiments.
Primarily, it indicates that for fully extractive samples, summaries can be generated by
directly running an extractive summarization system, and thus obtain similar (or better)
quality at a much lower cost. For MassiveSumm, a large fraction of invalid samples can be
attributed to duplicate content; manual inspection reveals that there are frequent generic
references or summary texts, such as “Read more after logging in!”. We assume the reason

=== Page 15 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 15
Min Length
Min
Fully
Duplicates
Dataset
Split Samples Ref Summ Id
CR
Extr
Exact
Ref
Summ
Valid Samples
Train 220,887
0
0
39
30
126,204
31
45
105
94,433
(42.75%)
MLSUM
Val
11,394
0
0
0
0
3,285
1
1
5
8,102
(71.11%)
Test
10,701
0
0
0
0
3,306
1
5
2
7,387
(69.03%)
MassiveS
Train 478,143 253 16,294
0 33,959
0
805
73,886 4,882
348,064
(72.79%)
Swisstext
Train 100,000
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
2
99,995
(100.00%)
WikiLing Train
58,341
11
0
0
1,435
0
4
2
52
56,837
(97.42%)
Train
2,346
0
0
0
10
0
0
2
0
2,334
(99.49%)
Klexikon
Val
273
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
272
(99.63%)
Test
274
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
273
(99.64%)
Train
1,115
0
0
0
18
0
0
0
0
1,097
(98.39%)
EUR-Lex
Val
187
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
187
(100.00%)
Test
188
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
188
(100.00%)
Train
79,937
0
2
0
12
326
233
95
3,106
76,163
(95.28%)
LegalSum Val
9,992
0
0
0
4
32
14
2
157
9,783
(97.91%)
Test
9,993
0
0
0
7
33
8
1
59
9,885
(98.92%)
Tab. 2: German text summarization datasets in numbers. Given are the original sample count and
breakdown of filtered samples by automated assessment (cf., Sect. 3.1) for all provided splits. We set
the Minimum Length to 20 characters for summaries and 50 for references, except for WikiLingua,
which has limits of 8 and 20 characters, respectively, due to a different domain. Id refers to samples
with same reference and summary text, Min CR ensures references are at least 25% longer than
summaries, and Fully Extr identifies consecutive segments that are used as fully extractive summaries.
For duplicates, we differentiate between both reference and summary appearing in the corpus (Exact),
versus partial duplicates where only one of reference (Ref) or summary (Summ) are appearing
elsewhere. Numbers in bold highlight issues affecting more than 2% of the split data.
to be a faulty extraction of HTML elements for particular websites.
The remaining inspected datasets were affected at a much lower rate; we see several subsets
that have only a handful of faulty instances. Depending on the overall size of the dataset,
this implies that evaluation scores will differ less between unfiltered and filtered splits of
largely unaffected datasets.
4.2
Consistent Results and Baseline Runs
Key Finding 2: Existing evaluation scores are hard (if not outright impossible)
to reproduce, even with model weights publicly available.
Key Finding 3: Authors frequently fail to put scores into context, not comparing
their own results against baseline methods for further scrutiny.
Another worrying trend we observe in the “reproducibility” column of Tab. 1, is the
consistent inability to even approximately reproduce self-reported scores for any of the

=== Page 16 ===

16 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
evaluated models. In our reproduction attempts, we employed no particular further filtering,
and observed scores that were anywhere from 5 points worse to 3 points better than
self-reported ones on the test set. Only a singular result was reproducible within 0.5 ROUGE
points of the expected results. In particular, we find that implementation details on filtering
steps and other subselection criteria are rarely (if ever) included in the documentation of
training procedures. While the usage of so-called “model cards” [Mi19], i.e., dedicated
documentation pages for particular training results, has improved the availability of at least
some form of documentation, these descriptions are still insufficient to fully reproduce
results. As a side note, it should also be mentioned that multiple implementations for the
ROUGE evaluation metric exist16, which may result in scoring differences by utilizing
different text processing tools or implementations. To ensure reproducibility of our own
scores, we mention that scores were computed with help of the rouge-score package,
version 0.1.2. We further replaced the default stemming algorithm with the German Cistem
stemmer [WF17] to provide a reasonable upper-bound of scores and use the provided
bootstrap sampler with 𝑛= 2000.
Aside from the lack of reproducible results, we also noted that only few public models
report against a set of (consistent) baselines, with the most commonly compared approach
being lead-3. Given that we have also presented a cleaned portion of popular evaluation
models, we strive for a more comprehensive comparison of actual results, and investigate
resulting implications that were omitted in the original evaluation settings.
In our particular setup, we compare against the three mentioned extractive baselines
mentioned in Sect. 3.3 and report scores in Tab. 3. Depending on the dataset, the choice of
a baseline can heavily skew the interpretation compared to neural methods. For example, on
the Klexikon dataset, using lead-3 can lead to a roughly 12-13 point drop in ROUGE-1 scores
compared to scores by the lead-𝑘or LexRank-ST baseline. On the other hand, for lead-heavy
and short texts in MLSUM, lead-3 serves as the best baseline method. Our recommendation
is therefore to similarly use multiple (different) baseline approaches, resulting in a more
defined context for evaluation based on ROUGE scores. While it may be easier to simply
copy results from prior work, we highly recommend the reproduction of these results first,
as scores may ultimately vary between different experimental setups.
4.3
Impact of Data Filtering
Key Finding 4: After filtering, scores can drop by more than 20 ROUGE-1
points on the MLSUM test set.
To illustrate the effect of dataset filtering on downstream performance, we further compare
results on the two most-affected datasets (MLSUM and MassiveSumm). Without any
additional training, we run all available public models on the validation and test portion of
16 e.g., rouge-score (https://pypi.org/project/rouge-score/, last accessed: 2022-10-06) or pyrouge (https:
//pypi.org/project/pyrouge/, last accessed: 2022-10-06)

=== Page 17 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 17
Validation Set
Test Set
Dataset
Method
R-1
R-2
R-L
R-1
R-2
R-L
lead-3
19.06
5.58
13.21
18.90
5.47
13.04
MLSUM
lead-𝑘
14.93
4.12
11.31
15.08
4.17
11.45
LexRank-ST
15.78
3.36
11.52
16.04
3.30
11.55
lead-3
15.19
3.46
9.10
15.87
3.64
9.35
Klexikon
lead-𝑘
28.11
5.51
12.43
28.34
5.50
12.50
LexRank-ST
27.23
4.63
11.48
27.42
4.58
11.55
lead-3
16.72
2.80
10.51
16.74
2.86
10.53
LegalSum
lead-𝑘
14.34
2.27
8.78
14.36
2.34
8.78
LexRank-ST
21.54
6.22
12.97
21.35
5.99
12.74
lead-3
3.31
2.25
2.72
3.31
2.19
2.67
EUR-Lex-Sum
lead-𝑘
41.74
17.77
16.04
39.42
17.08
15.52
LexRank-ST
39.37
15.13
15.26
38.48
15.18
15.19
Tab. 3: Baseline results for all datasets with available validation and/or test splits. We report ROUGE
F1 scores on the filtered datasets.
MLSUM, for which we also obtain scores on the original unfiltered sets. Our findings can
be seen in Tab. 4, where one can observe a performance drop in every model, even those
that were not originally trained on the MLSUM dataset itself (t5-base). By far the worst
affected are the two baselines constructed from leading sentences, as well as the mT5-small
models by users mrm8488 and Shahm. These four models all achieve unreasonably high
ROUGE-2 scores before filtering and see a reduction to about one fifth of the original scores
after filtering. Upon inspection, we similarly found that these models were ultimately simply
re-generating the first tokens from the input article. These findings are concerning, as they
ultimately question the current state-of-the-art on the MLSUM dataset. It further validates
the necessity of filtering, given that we can ultimately change the course of evaluation and
interpretation of models. For MLSUM, per our results, the t5-base model, trained on a
related news dataset and utilizing the largest underlying neural model, seems to perform best
on filtered datasets while originally lagging behind even a simple lead-3 baseline. This is
particularly interesting, because the underlying model checkpoint used is primarily trained
on English texts.
Figure 2 further visualizes the impact of filtering on the length distributions of the two
heavily affected datasets, MLSUM and MassiveSumm. Analyzing the resulting changes in
more detail, we can observe a more strictly enforced minimum length for both references and
summaries in the MLSUM dataset even before filtering. In stark contrast, MassiveSumm is
shrunk considerably by the minimum length filter, which in turn shifts the samples towards
generally longer reference texts. Since MLSUM is affected more by the extractiveness filter,
one can observe a noticeable change in the mean of the distribution of summary texts,
particularly longer ones.
Changes in the length distribution, however, do not explain any of the deterioration in raw
ROUGE scores; a further indicator that several different evaluation methods need to be

=== Page 18 ===

18 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
(a) Reference Text Lengths
(b) Summary Text Lengths
Fig. 2: Violin plots illustrating the distributional shift on the MLSUM and MassiveSumm training
splits through filtering. Black dashed lines indicate mean and quartiles of the distribution.
combined in order to paint a more complete picture for the realistic performance of models.
We particularly recommend the utilization of violin plots also for the evaluation of system
outputs, as they allow the comparison of length estimates by the system in comparison to
ground truth data.
4.4
Qualitative Analysis of Generated Summaries
Key Finding 5: With the exception of one work [Ak20], no publicly available
system performs experiments beyond simple ROUGE score computation.
Key Finding 6: Despite high reported scores, catastrophic failures can be
observed in some systems.
Key Finding 7: All utilized architectures only work with a relatively limited
context, proving to be incapable of dealing with long-form summarization.
The first criterion we were looking at when checking for existing systems is the evaluation
setting that was used in the respective work. The findings, reported in Tab. 1, point towards a
more rigorous evaluation setting for models backed by a scientific publication, which comes
as no surprise. However, we also note that these systems are also more likely to withhold
their respective models from public access. This ultimately means that those models can
only be judged based on the reported evaluation and no further black-box model checks can
be performed on them. To aggregate the insights gained across these works, most frequently
mentioned is the issue of factual consistency [Ve19, FBZ19], which does not bode well for
the practical suitability of such systems beyond simple settings. Secondly, several works
also investigate system outputs’ fluency [FBZ19, Ak20], where abstractive models could
provide sensible improvements over extractive systems. However, especially for earlier
works, consistent generations from language models still prove to be difficult.

=== Page 19 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 19
MLSUM Validation Split
MLSUM Test Split
Unfiltered
Filtered
Unfiltered
Filtered
Model
R-1
R-2
R-L
R-1
R-2
R-L
R-1
R-2
R-L
R-1
R-2
R-L
Lead-3
36.22 26.24 31.89
19.06 5.58 13.21
37.15 27.48 32.94
18.90 5.47 13.04
Lead-𝑘
29.25 20.92 26.51
14.93 4.12 11.31
31.35 22.86 28.58
15.08 4.17 11.45
LexRank-ST
18.62
6.46
14.26
15.78 3.36 11.52
18.83
6.45
14.36
16.04 3.30 11.55
mrm8488
42.77 31.89 38.93
21.63 6.64 16.32
44.05 33.44 40.36
21.31 6.36 16.09
ml6team
28.17 18.81 26.05
17.08 5.03 14.18
28.51 19.52 26.53
16.56 4.80 13.78
T-Systems
23.74 11.08 20.34
19.87 6.49 16.40
23.67 11.21 20.36
19.20 6.11 15.84
Shahm
42.59 31.96 38.70
21.50 6.87 16.15
43.92 33.62 40.09
21.20 6.62 15.79
t5-base
27.54 11.31 20.88
23.31 7.19 16.99
27.99 11.65 21.20
23.40 7.20 16.91
Tab. 4: ROUGE F1 scores on the MLSUM validation and test splits, comparing results with and
without data filtering. Across all tested models, a stark drop in performance can be observed. We
highlight the highest score for each split in bold.
To follow our own advice, we manually investigated instances of generated outputs from
systems in Table 4. In addition to samples from the MLSUM dataset, we further tested with
instances from the Klexikon and WikiLingua datasets to check for domain generalization.
As others have noted, the factual consistency of abstractive systems is questionable at best,
but understated just how badly summaries can deviate from the original. Several times a
reversed order of aggressors and victims (respectively, winners or losers in sports game)
was generated, and in one particular instance the context was altered from “live-saving” to
“drowning (someone)” by the summarization system. This happened on “in-domain samples”
from the MLSUM test set.
A similar observation can be made for the syntactic quality of generations, where overfitting
of systems becomes particularly apparent during the zero-shot evaluation on other datasets.
While it can be expected that the quality of a generated summary may lack in content
accuracy or truthfulness, oftentimes no coherent sentence was provided. Less tragic, but
difficult for system comparison, is the multitude of parameters for generation functions.
While self-reported scores of public models generally rely on greedily decoded summaries,
one model frequently started repeating short sequences of about three words indefinitely
until the maximum generation length was reached. Importantly, such repetitions are not
obvious from looking at a ROUGE-based evaluation of model outputs alone, but could be
easily suppressed by enabling 𝑛-gram-based filtering during the generation.
We were also able to verify that the highly-scoring models by users mrm8488 and Shahm
indeed only copy the leading tokens from the input samples, likely due to training on
unfiltered MLSUM splits. This spells further trouble for “state-of-the-art” models, as it
requires a deeper examination for determining which summaries are actually better than
simple string selection approaches, such as lead-3. We hypothesize that the same concept
used in our extractiveness filter can also be applied to generated outputs; with a slightly
altered similarity scoring mechanism, e.g., the longest common subsequence algorithm,
even near duplicates could be detected and flagged for manual review.

=== Page 20 ===

20 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
Most prominently though, due to architectural constraints of the underlying neural models,
none of the currently public systems is able to capture an input context beyond 512 subword
tokens, the default length limit for the Transformer architectures [Va17]. In the instance
of domain-specific datasets, such as EUR-Lex-Sum, this means that even the length of
summary texts exceeds the limitation of models, effectively rendering them useless in this
particular context.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
Studying the current landscape of German abstractive summarization initially paints a grim
picture: While the general willingness and ease of sharing systems has greatly increased
over the past years, around half of the currently known German summarization systems still
remain inaccessible to the public. Of those that are available for public scrutiny, a prominent
focus on news summarization is still persisting, preventing more broader applications. Even
worse, the most prominent dataset contains severe flaws in the sample quality, leading to
models whose generalization capabilities, even in-domain, are severely hampered by the
unfiltered data. This also hints at the general level of care practitioners take with respect
to exploratory data analysis, given that several issues can be spotted by simply inspecting
just a few samples. And finally, even models that take care of filtering some of these issues,
a qualitative analysis of generations can still reveal catastrophic problems that prevent an
ethically responsible deployment of the solution in practice.
However, there are some silver linings at the horizon. Many of the major data-centric issues
can be easily fixed with the introduced quality checks, which can be applied cost-effectively
across multiple datasets, as we have demonstrated in this work. Through publishing our pre-
processing pipeline, we hope to encourage others in taking a more data-centric exploration
before starting with the ultimate model training.
Within just two years, we have also seen an unbelievable influx of available summarization
datasets for German, importantly extending past the narrow domains into application-
specific fields, such as law and medicine, and totaling more than 700.000 samples across
publicly available resources. This hopefully paves the way towards a more consistent and
generalized approach in German abstractive summarization research; should the efforts
of the community keep at the current rate, we will likely see meaningful progress within
the next year. The latest trends in the English summarization community also indicate a
shift towards greater awareness of long-form summarization [PZL22]; while dedicated long
context German (or multilingual) model checkpoints are still absent, we estimate that such
systems will become available shortly, serving as a compute-intensive way to escape the
current restrictions on input length.
As for our own efforts, we are currently investigating how systems can be designed to
work well across multiple domains at once, without the need for several distinct models.
This requires careful analysis of the underlying data, as well as a more agnostic training
framework to prevent overfitting towards a particular style.

=== Page 21 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 21
Bibliography
[ACG22]
Aumiller, Dennis; Chouhan, Ashish; Gertz, Michael: EUR-Lex-Sum: A Multi- and Cross-
lingual Dataset for Long-form Summarization in the Legal Domain. In: Proceedings of
the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, pp. 7626–7639,
December 2022.
[AG22]
Aumiller, Dennis; Gertz, Michael: Klexikon: A German Dataset for Joint Summarization
and Simplification. In: Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence. European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France, pp. 2693–2701,
June 2022.
[Ak20]
Aksenov, Dmitrii; Schneider, Julián Moreno; Bourgonje, Peter; Schwarzenberg, Robert;
Hennig, Leonhard; Rehm, Georg: Abstractive Text Summarization based on Language
Model Conditioning and Locality Modeling. In (Calzolari, Nicoletta; Béchet, Frédéric;
Blache, Philippe; Choukri, Khalid; Cieri, Christopher; Declerck, Thierry; Goggi, Sara;
Isahara, Hitoshi; Maegaard, Bente; Mariani, Joseph; Mazo, Hélène; Moreno, Asunción;
Odĳk, Jan; Piperidis, Stelios, eds): Proceedings of The 12th Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference, LREC 2020, Marseille, France, May 11-16, 2020. European
Language Resources Association, pp. 6680–6689, 2020.
[BC20]
Bommasani, Rishi; Cardie, Claire: Intrinsic Evaluation of Summarization Datasets.
In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp. 8075–8096,
November 2020.
[BCB15]
Bahdanau, Dzmitry; Cho, Kyunghyun; Bengio, Yoshua: Neural Machine Translation
by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate. In (Bengio, Yoshua; LeCun, Yann, eds):
3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA,
USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings. 2015.
[Be16]
Benikova, Darina; Mieskes, Margot; Meyer, Christian M.; Gurevych, Iryna: Bridging the
gap between extractive and abstractive summaries: Creation and evaluation of coherent
extracts from heterogeneous sources. In: Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers. The COLING
2016 Organizing Committee, Osaka, Japan, pp. 1039–1050, December 2016.
[Bi20]
Biesner, David; Brito, Eduardo; Hillebrand, Lars Patrick; Sifa, Rafet: Hybrid Ensemble
Predictor as Quality Metric for German Text Summarization: Fraunhofer IAIS at
GermEval 2020 Task 3. In (Ebling, Sarah; Tuggener, Don; Hürlimann, Manuela; Cieliebak,
Mark; Volk, Martin, eds): Proceedings of the 5th Swiss Text Analytics Conference and
the 16th Conference on Natural Language Processing, SwissText/KONVENS 2020,
Zurich, Switzerland, June 23-25, 2020. volume 2624 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings.
CEUR-WS.org, 2020.
[DBWR21] Deutsch, Daniel; Bedrax-Weiss, Tania; Roth, Dan: Towards Question-Answering as an
Automatic Metric for Evaluating the Content Quality of a Summary. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:774–789, 2021.
[DDR21]
Deutsch, Daniel; Dror, Rotem; Roth, Dan: A Statistical Analysis of Summarization
Evaluation Metrics Using Resampling Methods. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 9:1132–1146, 2021.

=== Page 22 ===

22 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
[ECM19]
Ermakova, Liana; Cossu, Jean Valère; Mothe, Josiane: A survey on evaluation of
summarization methods. Information processing & management, 56(5):1794–1814,
2019.
[ER04]
Erkan, Günes; Radev, Dragomir R.: LexRank: Graph-based Lexical Centrality as Salience
in Text Summarization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 22:457–479, 2004.
[Fa21]
Fabbri, Alexander R.; Kryściński, Wojciech; McCann, Bryan; Xiong, Caiming; Socher,
Richard; Radev, Dragomir: SummEval: Re-evaluating Summarization Evaluation. Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:391–409, 2021.
[FBZ19]
Fecht, Pascal; Blank, Sebastian; Zorn, Hans-Peter: Sequential Transfer Learning in
NLP for German Text Summarization. In (Cieliebak, Mark; Tuggener, Don; Benites,
Fernando, eds): Proceedings of the 4th Swiss Text Analytics Conference, SwissText
2019, Winterthur, Switzerland, June 18-19, 2019. volume 2458 of CEUR Workshop
Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org, 2019.
[Fr20]
Frefel, Dominik: Summarization Corpora of Wikipedia Articles. In: Proceedings of the
12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. European Language Resources
Association, Marseille, France, pp. 6651–6655, May 2020.
[FVM20]
Frefel, Dominik; Vogel, Manfred; Märki, Fabian: 2nd German Text Summarization
Challenge. In (Ebling, Sarah; Tuggener, Don; Hürlimann, Manuela; Cieliebak, Mark;
Volk, Martin, eds): Proceedings of the 5th Swiss Text Analytics Conference and the
16th Conference on Natural Language Processing, SwissText/KONVENS 2020, Zurich,
Switzerland, June 23-25, 2020. volume 2624 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-
WS.org, 2020.
[GMM21]
Glaser, Ingo; Moser, Sebastian; Matthes, Florian: Summarization of German Court
Rulings. In: Proceedings of the Natural Legal Language Processing Workshop 2021.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, pp. 180–
189, November 2021.
[GNA18]
Grusky, Max; Naaman, Mor; Artzi, Yoav: Newsroom: A Dataset of 1.3 Million Summaries
with Diverse Extractive Strategies. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, New
Orleans, Louisiana, pp. 708–719, June 2018.
[IPM20]
Iskender, Neslihan; Polzehl, Tim; Möller, Sebastian: Best Practices for Crowd-based
Evaluation of German Summarization: Comparing Crowd, Expert and Automatic
Evaluation. In: Proceedings of the First Workshop on Evaluation and Comparison
of NLP Systems. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp. 164–175,
November 2020.
[JJB21]
Johner, Timo; Jana, Abhik; Biemann, Chris: Error Analysis of using BART for Multi-
Document Summarization: A Study for English and German Language. In: Proceedings
of the 23rd Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics (NoDaLiDa). Linköping
University Electronic Press, Sweden, Reykjavik, Iceland, pp. 391–397, May 31–2 June
2021.
[Kr20]
Kryscinski, Wojciech; McCann, Bryan; Xiong, Caiming; Socher, Richard: Evaluating
the Factual Consistency of Abstractive Text Summarization. In: Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp. 9332–9346, November 2020.

=== Page 23 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 23
[Kr22]
Kreutzer, Julia; Caswell, Isaac; Wang, Lisa; Wahab, Ahsan; van Esch, Daan; Ulzii-
Orshikh, Nasanbayar; Tapo, Allahsera; Subramani, Nishant; Sokolov, Artem; Sikasote,
Claytone; Setyawan, Monang; Sarin, Supheakmungkol; Samb, Sokhar; Sagot, Benoît;
Rivera, Clara; Rios, Annette; Papadimitriou, Isabel; Osei, Salomey; Suarez, Pedro Ortiz;
Orife, Iroro; Ogueji, Kelechi; Rubungo, Andre Niyongabo; Nguyen, Toan Q.; Müller,
Mathias; Müller, André; Muhammad, Shamsuddeen Hassan; Muhammad, Nanda; Mnyak-
eni, Ayanda; Mirzakhalov, Jamshidbek; Matangira, Tapiwanashe; Leong, Colin; Lawson,
Nze; Kudugunta, Sneha; Jernite, Yacine; Jenny, Mathias; Firat, Orhan; Dossou, Bonaven-
ture F. P.; Dlamini, Sakhile; de Silva, Nisansa; Çabuk Ballı, Sakine; Biderman, Stella;
Battisti, Alessia; Baruwa, Ahmed; Bapna, Ankur; Baljekar, Pallavi; Azime, Israel Abebe;
Awokoya, Ayodele; Ataman, Duygu; Ahia, Orevaoghene; Ahia, Oghenefego; Agrawal,
Sweta; Adeyemi, Mofetoluwa: Quality at a Glance: An Audit of Web-Crawled Multilin-
gual Datasets. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:50–72,
2022.
[La20]
Ladhak, Faisal; Durmus, Esin; Cardie, Claire; McKeown, Kathleen: WikiLingua: A New
Benchmark Dataset for Cross-Lingual Abstractive Summarization. In: Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online, pp. 4034–4048, November 2020.
[Le20]
Lewis, Mike; Liu, Yinhan; Goyal, Naman; Ghazvininejad, Marjan; Mohamed, Ab-
delrahman; Levy, Omer; Stoyanov, Veselin; Zettlemoyer, Luke: BART: Denoising
Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language Generation, Translation, and
Comprehension. In (Jurafsky, Dan; Chai, Joyce; Schluter, Natalie; Tetreault, Joel R.,
eds): Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 7871–7880, 2020.
[Li04]
Lin, Chin-Yew: ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries. In: Text
Summarization Branches Out. Association for Computational Linguistics, Barcelona,
Spain, pp. 74–81, July 2004.
[Li20]
Liu, Yinhan; Gu, Jiatao; Goyal, Naman; Li, Xian; Edunov, Sergey; Ghazvininejad,
Marjan; Lewis, Mike; Zettlemoyer, Luke: Multilingual Denoising Pre-training for Neural
Machine Translation. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
8:726–742, 2020.
[Li22]
Liang, Siting; Kades, Klaus; Fink, Matthias; Full, Peter; Weber, Tim; Kleesiek, Jens;
Strube, Michael; Maier-Hein, Klaus: Fine-tuning BERT Models for Summarizing German
Radiology Findings. In: Proceedings of the 4th Clinical Natural Language Processing
Workshop. Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, WA, pp. 30–40, July
2022.
[Ma22]
May, Philip: , Anomalies in the MLSUM Dataset. https://may.la/blog/2022/02/23/
anomalies-in-the-mlsum-dataset/, 2022. Accessed: 2023-01-11.
[Mi19]
Mitchell, Margaret; Wu, Simone; Zaldivar, Andrew; Barnes, Parker; Vasserman, Lucy;
Hutchinson, Ben; Spitzer, Elena; Raji, Inioluwa Deborah; Gebru, Timnit: Model Cards
for Model Reporting. In (danah boyd; Morgenstern, Jamie H., eds): Proceedings of the
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* 2019, Atlanta, GA,
USA, January 29-31, 2019. ACM, pp. 220–229, 2019.

=== Page 24 ===

24 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
[MT04]
Mihalcea, Rada; Tarau, Paul: TextRank: Bringing Order into Text. In: Proceedings of the
2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 404–411, July 2004.
[Na21]
Nan, Feng; Nogueira dos Santos, Cicero; Zhu, Henghui; Ng, Patrick; McKeown, Kathleen;
Nallapati, Ramesh; Zhang, Dejiao; Wang, Zhiguo; Arnold, Andrew O.; Xiang, Bing:
Improving Factual Consistency of Abstractive Summarization via Question Answering.
In: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp.
6881–6894, August 2021.
[NCL18]
Narayan, Shashi; Cohen, Shay B.; Lapata, Mirella: Don’t Give Me the Details, Just the
Summary! Topic-Aware Convolutional Neural Networks for Extreme Summarization.
In: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 1797–
1807, October-November 2018.
[Ni19]
Nitsche, Matthias: Towards German Abstractive Text Summarization using Deep Learn-
ing. Master’s thesis, Hochschule für angewandte Wissenschaften Hamburg, 2019.
[NZZ17]
Nallapati, Ramesh; Zhai, Feifei; Zhou, Bowen: Summarunner: A recurrent neural network
based sequence model for extractive summarization of documents. In: Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. volume 31, 2017.
[PBL21]
Perez-Beltrachini, Laura; Lapata, Mirella: Models and Datasets for Cross-Lingual
Summarisation. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic, pp. 9408–9423, November 2021.
[PC20]
Paraschiv, Andrei; Cercel, Dumitru-Clementin: UPB at GermEval-2020 Task 3: Assessing
Summaries for German Texts using BERTScore and Sentence-BERT. In (Ebling, Sarah;
Tuggener, Don; Hürlimann, Manuela; Cieliebak, Mark; Volk, Martin, eds): Proceedings
of the 5th Swiss Text Analytics Conference and the 16th Conference on Natural Language
Processing, SwissText/KONVENS 2020, Zurich, Switzerland, June 23-25, 2020. volume
2624 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org, 2020.
[PM19]
Parida, Shantipriya; Motlícek, Petr: Idiap Abstract Text Summarization System for
German Text Summarization Task. In (Cieliebak, Mark; Tuggener, Don; Benites,
Fernando, eds): Proceedings of the 4th Swiss Text Analytics Conference, SwissText
2019, Winterthur, Switzerland, June 18-19, 2019. volume 2458 of CEUR Workshop
Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org, 2019.
[PZL22]
Phang, Jason; Zhao, Yao; Liu, Peter J: Investigating Efficiently Extending Transformers
for Long Input Summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.04347, 2022.
[Ra20]
Raffel, Colin; Shazeer, Noam; Roberts, Adam; Lee, Katherine; Narang, Sharan; Matena,
Michael; Zhou, Yanqi; Li, Wei; Liu, Peter J.: Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21:140:1–140:67, 2020.
[Re00]
Reithinger, Norbert; Kipp, Michael; Engel, Ralf; Alexandersson, Jan: Summarizing
Multilingual Spoken Negotiation Dialogues. In: Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational
Linguistics, Hong Kong, pp. 310–317, October 2000.

=== Page 25 ===

On the State of German (Abstractive) Text Summarization 25
[RG19]
Reimers, Nils; Gurevych, Iryna: Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese
BERT-Networks. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-ĲCNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Hong Kong, China, pp. 3982–3992, November 2019.
[RG20]
Reimers, Nils; Gurevych, Iryna: Making Monolingual Sentence Embeddings Multilingual
using Knowledge Distillation. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online, pp. 4512–4525, November 2020.
[Sc20]
Scialom, Thomas; Dray, Paul-Alexis; Lamprier, Sylvain; Piwowarski, Benjamin; Staiano,
Jacopo: MLSUM: The Multilingual Summarization Corpus. In: Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp. 8051–8067, November 2020.
[SDP20]
Sellam, Thibault; Das, Dipanjan; Parikh, Ankur: BLEURT: Learning Robust Metrics
for Text Generation. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp.
7881–7892, July 2020.
[SJ97]
Sparck Jones, Karen: Summarising: Where are we now? Where should we go? In:
Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization. 1997.
[SVL14]
Sutskever, Ilya; Vinyals, Oriol; Le, Quoc V.: Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural
Networks. In (Ghahramani, Zoubin; Welling, Max; Cortes, Corinna; Lawrence, Neil D.;
Weinberger, Kilian Q., eds): Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2014, December 8-13
2014, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. pp. 3104–3112, 2014.
[tHKdR20] ter Hoeve, Maartje; Kiseleva, Julia; de Rĳke, Maarten: What Makes a Good Summary?
Reconsidering the Focus of Automatic Summarization. CoRR, abs/2012.07619, 2020.
[Ur22]
Urlana, Ashok; Surange, Nirmal; Baswani, Pavan; Ravva, Priyanka; Shrivastava, Manish:
TeSum: Human-Generated Abstractive Summarization Corpus for Telugu. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. European Language
Resources Association, Marseille, France, pp. 5712–5722, June 2022.
[Va17]
Vaswani, Ashish; Shazeer, Noam; Parmar, Niki; Uszkoreit, Jakob; Jones, Llion; Gomez,
Aidan N.; Kaiser, Lukasz; Polosukhin, Illia: Attention is All you Need. In (Guyon, Isabelle;
von Luxburg, Ulrike; Bengio, Samy; Wallach, Hanna M.; Fergus, Rob; Vishwanathan,
S. V. N.; Garnett, Roman, eds): Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9,
2017, Long Beach, CA, USA. pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
[Ve19]
Venzin, Valentin; Deriu, Jan; Orel, Didier; Cieliebak, Mark: Fact-aware Abstractive
Text Summarization using a Pointer-Generator Network. In (Cieliebak, Mark; Tuggener,
Don; Benites, Fernando, eds): Proceedings of the 4th Swiss Text Analytics Conference,
SwissText 2019, Winterthur, Switzerland, June 18-19, 2019. volume 2458 of CEUR
Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org, 2019.
[VS21]
Varab, Daniel; Schluter, Natalie: MassiveSumm: a very large-scale, very multilingual,
news summarisation dataset. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, pp. 10150–10161, November 2021.

=== Page 26 ===

26 Dennis Aumiller, Jing Fan, Michael Gertz
[WF17]
Weissweiler, Leonie; Fraser, Alexander: Developing a Stemmer for German Based on
a Comparative Analysis of Publicly Available Stemmers. In (Rehm, Georg; Declerck,
Thierry, eds): Language Technologies for the Challenges of the Digital Age - 27th Interna-
tional Conference, GSCL 2017, Berlin, Germany, September 13-14, 2017, Proceedings.
volume 10713 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, pp. 81–94, 2017.
[Wo20]
Wolf, Thomas; Debut, Lysandre; Sanh, Victor; Chaumond, Julien; Delangue, Clement;
Moi, Anthony; Cistac, Pierric; Rault, Tim; Louf, Remi; Funtowicz, Morgan; Davison,
Joe; Shleifer, Sam; von Platen, Patrick; Ma, Clara; Jernite, Yacine; Plu, Julien; Xu,
Canwen; Le Scao, Teven; Gugger, Sylvain; Drame, Mariama; Lhoest, Quentin; Rush,
Alexander: Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language Processing. In: Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp. 38–45, October
2020.
[Xu21]
Xue, Linting; Constant, Noah; Roberts, Adam; Kale, Mihir; Al-Rfou, Rami; Siddhant,
Aditya; Barua, Aditya; Raffel, Colin: mT5: A Massively Multilingual Pre-trained Text-
to-Text Transformer. In (Toutanova, Kristina; Rumshisky, Anna; Zettlemoyer, Luke;
Hakkani-Tür, Dilek; Beltagy, Iz; Bethard, Steven; Cotterell, Ryan; Chakraborty, Tanmoy;
Zhou, Yichao, eds): Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 483–498, 2021.
[Zh19]
Zhong, Ming; Wang, Danqing; Liu, Pengfei; Qiu, Xipeng; Huang, Xuanjing: A Closer
Look at Data Bias in Neural Extractive Summarization Models. In: Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, pp. 80–89, November 2019.
[Zh20]
Zhang, Tianyi; Kishore, Varsha; Wu, Felix; Weinberger, Kilian Q.; Artzi, Yoav:
BERTScore: Evaluating Text Generation with BERT. In: 8th International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30,
2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
[Zh21a]
Zhu, Chenguang; Hinthorn, William; Xu, Ruochen; Zeng, Qingkai; Zeng, Michael;
Huang, Xuedong; Jiang, Meng: Enhancing Factual Consistency of Abstractive Summa-
rization. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp. 718–733, June 2021.
[Zh21b]
Zhu, Chenguang; Yang, Ziyi; Gmyr, Robert; Zeng, Michael; Huang, Xuedong: Leveraging
Lead Bias for Zero-shot Abstractive News Summarization. In (Diaz, Fernando; Shah,
Chirag; Suel, Torsten; Castells, Pablo; Jones, Rosie; Sakai, Tetsuya, eds): SIGIR ’21: The
44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, Virtual Event, Canada, July 11-15, 2021. ACM, pp. 1462–1471, 2021.
[Zo18]
Zopf, Markus: Auto-hMDS: Automatic Construction of a Large Heterogeneous Mul-
tilingual Multi-Document Summarization Corpus. In: Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018). Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA), Miyazaki, Japan, May 2018.
